We’re preparing to wrap up another busy day in Scotland. I think we got a lot done. We had a lot of good substantive meetings with my fellow leaders, and most of all, it was critically important to the United States to be here at COP26. Back in the Paris Agreement, raising domestic climate ambitions, and demonstrating a commitment to support the rest of the world, particularly those countries that are on the front lines of the climate crisis. Today, I spoke with leaders of forested nations, island nations, developing countries, and my message to them was United States is going to be their partner as we meet this climate crisis. And I want to thank the United Kingdom and Prime Minister Johnson for hosting us, hosting the world, at a critical moment, as well as I met with Prince Charles, who’s put together a very significant operation over the last six, seven years trying to bring in the private sector to work on a number of these issues.
Glasgow must be the start of, you’re tired of hearing me say it, but a decisive decade of action so we can keep the limit of 1.5 degrees within the reach of us and the rest of the world. We have to keep accelerating our progress. Today’s agreement by than 100 countries representing 85% of the world’s forests to halt and reverse deforestation by 2030. There’s a great example of the kind of ambition we need and the United States is proud to have initiated and supported it. For our part, the United States is going to keep raising the ambition and delivering the goal that we are reducing U.S. emissions by 50% to 52%, as Secretary Kerry’s talked about, from the 2005 levels by 2030. This decade we have to make significant progress. And by the way, I might note parenthetically, I can’t think of any two days where more has been accomplished dealing with climate than these two days.
Overall, the past two days, I’ve announced a series of initiatives that are going to make sure we hit the target of including today two new rules to reduce methane losses from new and existing oil and gas operations and from natural gas pipelines. Thanks to our joint effort with the EU, we’ve grown the Global Methane Pledge. Remember I raised it when I spoke to the United Nations from nine countries signing onto that pledge in September at the United Nations. More than 100 countries have signed on. It’s about half the world’s methane emissions and 70% of the worlds global GDP. We made commitments to promote climate smart agriculture, spur innovation, catalyze private finance for a clean economy and to drive high standard clean climate resilient infrastructure through the Build Back Better initiative. We had a great meeting today where we sat and talked about the whole focus of my Build Back Better initiative, which was adopted by the G7, was that everything should be focused on as we help with the infrastructure of the rest of the world, which needs it badly, focused on climate, climate.
The example is that, you build a gas or oil refinery, you’re going to have that for next 30 years. Well, why not invest now if we’re going to provide for the help for nations in solar capacity or wind capacity? The point is, we also brought through the new President’s Emergency Plan for Adaptation and Resilience. We called it, I’m getting tired of acronyms I have to admit to you, but it’s called a PREPARE. We’re going to support climate adaptation efforts and more than a half a billion people worldwide. We also released our overall longterm strategy that outlines how we’ll get to net zero emissions by 2050. We know that this must be a whole society effort. I also want to thank the representatives from the private sector and from labor and philanthropies, civil societies who are dedicating themselves to the climate action efforts we’re all making here.
That leadership together with action by state and local and tribal governments has been essential in the United States. That’s why despite the previous administrations pulling us out of the Paris Agreement and refusing even to acknowledge there was a climate crisis, we still brought down emissions during that period. I also want to acknowledge the passion and power of the young people and the activists who are doing such vital work to remind us of our moral obligation to future generations. But look, as I said yesterday, it’s not just a moral imperative. It’s an economic imperative as well. Investing in our clean energy future is an enormous opportunity for every country to create good paying jobs and spur a broad based economic recovery. As I’ve said, you heard me say it before and my colleague as well, when I think of climate crisis, I think of jobs and that’s what the Build Back Better framework will do for the American people.
It’s going to bring historic investment in clean energy addressing the climate crisis. It’s going to cut greenhouse gas emissions by well over a gigaton by 2030. It’s going to save consumers money on their energy bills and tax credits for things like installing solar panels and weatherization of their homes. It’s also going to provide manufacturing credits to make sure the United States is competing in energy markets for future like solar panels and wind turbines. It’s also going to accelerate electric vehicles and electric school buses and build a nationwide network of 500,000 charging stations of power. It’s about jobs. It’s about competitiveness versus complacent. It’s about making the world safer, cleaner, healthier, a place for our children and children all around the world to look to the future in a way that they can’t now. And so there’s so many other things that have happened today that I feel good about, but let me start, if you will, I’ll be happy to take your questions. Phil, you got a question? I watch you on TV a lot.
